OK, I've got I think, one more table join type of relationship that I want to show you or technique
before we wrap up this whole entire database module.
I want to revisit how we were recording the relationship between parents and children.
So here I've got our depiction that I've been using to kind of show how we're doing these things.
And just as a quick reminder, here we've got a table for the people.
And when we wanted to record who the children were for a parent, the way we did that was by adding
an additional column on to this table called Parent I.D. And so any record that has a parent ID filled
in that implies that that record is a child of that particular parent, right?
So in this case, and Jackson is a child of the record with ID 10, which would be Terry Smith.
So that is to say that Alan Jackson is Jerry Smith's daughter, presumably or child.
Again, we've got Larry Kim, who is also the child of Jerry Smith, because we added this column here
parent ID OK, pointing to 10.
This column, by the way, can be called a join column.
It's the column that specifies how to join these records together.
OK, so that's a joined column, however, and I think I might have mentioned this briefly before.
It is possible to record these relationships.
And by the way, it doesn't just have to be parent child relationships.
It can be the relationship between people and addresses or anything.
So one to one relationships, one to many relationships, whatever kind of relationships you want to
record.
We can record these relationships without having to modify the tables that hold these records.
So here we modified the people table by adding a join column onto this table, the parent ID column
here.
But we could have done this without modifying or without adding this parent ID column at all.
So another way that you can record these these relationships between records and tables and entities
is actually by adding a whole additional table called a join table.
So the join table can let us do the same kind of thing that we're doing here.
However, one major benefit of a join table is that you no longer have to modify the original tables
that were already in the database.
OK.
So let me show you what that would look like.
So here I've got the people table, but then I've added this join table here, and it's pretty straightforward.
So if I wanted to say that Jerry Smith is the parent of Frank Jones and Ann Jackson, I can use this
join table and say that I've got a parent who points to ID of 10.
That would be Jerry Smith because his ideas 10.
And he has a child who has an idea of 20, which would be Frank Jones.
And he also has another child with ID of 30 who is and Jackson.
So that's pretty straightforward, right?
So, pretty simple.
And then we can still use our joint techniques with sequel to join these tables together, and we can
actually join from the people table as a parent to the parent child table.
And then from the parent child table back to the people table as a child to get ultimately the parent
child relationships that we already were doing with this parent ID column here.
So in other words, you could do all of that parent child stuff or one to ones or whatever relationships
without the join column.
So let's try this out.
Now, we're not going to write any code for this as we're trying to wrap this all up, but I just want
to show you how we can do this using the Squirrel sequel client.
All right.
So here we are back in the Squirrel sequel client, and I'm just going to reconnect to the database.
OK?
And so what we're going to do now is we're going to go ahead and just create that parent child table.
So to do so, I will issue some doodle recalled doodle stands for database definition language.
So those are the commands that we can use not to query for data, but to create structures or objects
in the database, such as tables and indexes and columns and things like that.
All right, so we will create a new table.
And it is fairly common to name join tables from the tables that they are referencing.
So in this case, we're referencing the people table and we're only going to reference the people table,
but we're going to reference it in two different context.
Reference it once on this column as parents.
And then again on this column as children.
And so I'm choosing the name this join table parent child.
So technically, it's the name isn't referencing the actual name of the table, it's referencing the
use of the table in this particular case.
All right.
So I'm going to name this table parent underscored child, and then I'm going to state that it's going
to have one column called Parent ID, which will be of type big end because it's going to be referencing
primary key IDs of records in the people table.
So big end.
And then I need to specify that this will be a foreign key column.
So recall that when we have these columns that are pointing back to records in other tables or in there
or in their own table, we can constrain those references by declaring the column as a foreign key column.
And so the way to do that is to say references, the people table and its ID column like so and then
we're going to have another column, which is this Child ID column, and it's data definition will really
look exactly the same as the parent child.
So both columns are simply referring back to primary key columns in the people table.
So I will essentially just put a comma here and then do the same thing.
Except now instead of parent ID, this will be child ID of type big end, which also references the
People Table Column ID.
And then I will close all of that off with a closing parentheses and then execute this.
All right, there we go.
And now I want to insert some records in here.
So let me first just query the database, query the people table to remember what some of the records
are that we have in here.
So, yeah, we've got Harry Johnson and Jack and Mary and Sabrina.
So I'm just going to declare that Harry Johnson is the parent of Jack and Mary.
All right.
So to do that, what I will do is I will insert into my new join table parent child.
Now I'm going to skip specifying the names of the columns that I want to insert data into because this
parent child join table only has two columns anyway, so I can jump straight to just declaring the values
part of this now and say that I want to insert for a parent ID.
The parent ID of one, which is Harry Johnson and then his child, one of his children is Jack, which
is the ID of two, and then execute that.
OK.
And then I'm just going to reuse this and say that he has another child pointing to three ID, three,
which is Mary.
And then I'm going to execute that.
All right.
And now I will just query from select everything from the parent child table and just confirm that I've
got those records.
And yes, I do.
So Harry Johnson has this kid and Harry Johnson has this other kid as well.
All right.
And now that I've done that, let's put this to use and perform a join to get all of the children of
Harry Johnson.
So this should be pretty familiar now because it'll pretty much be the same format as the other left
outer join queries that we've done previously so I can select now.
I'm not going to select every single column.
I'm just going to stick with just the first and last names for now because I don't want to type a bunch
here, so I'm going to select parent dot first name as parent underscore first underscore name, comma
parent dot last name as parent underscore last underscore name comma, child dot first name as child
underscore first name comma child dot last underscore name as child underscore last name from people
as parent.
Now the next part is going to be a little bit different now because now, instead of just doing a left
outer, join back to the people table.
I'm now going to perform a left outer join first to the join table.
So that will look like this left outer.
Join parent child.
That's the name of our.
Join Table Parent Child, as now I'm just going to call this PC because again, I don't want to type
a whole lot here as PC on parent dot IED equal to PC Dot parent underscore ID.
So let's look at what what I'm saying here.
Left outer join to the parent child table.
So we're going to do a left outer join from people table to the parent child table, and we're going
to call it PC, or we're going to reference the parent child join table as PC, and we're going to join
on the parent dot IED.
Remember, now parent is just an alias for people right now, so wherever the parent IED?
This column here is equal to PC, parent ID and PC is our parent child join table.
So that's this table.
So all we're saying now is join on the People Tables ID column equal equaling the parent child's parent
ID column.
OK, so join on those columns.
Then we need to do another left outer join from the parent child child ID column.
Back to the people table ID column again.
OK, so to do that, we'll do left outer join people table as child now.
OK, so we're going from people to parent child and then from parent child, back to people.
But the first time we go from people to parent child, that's describing the relationship between parents.
And this drawing table.
And now this next time that we're going from the parent child back to the people table, now we're describing
the relationship between the join table and the children.
OK.
So from parents to join and then from join to children, that's what we're doing.
OK, so now we're describing from joined to children to left outer join people as a child on child.
That IED equal to PC dot child underscore IED.
And honestly, I don't think it really matters too much.
If you say Child ID first or if you say PC, that child I.D. the important thing here is that they need
to be equal, right?
There needs to be that relationship.
That's that's really all that matters.
OK.
And that should be it right there.
So if we go ahead and execute this now, I'm not constraining it to say which parent to look for because
it's not really going to matter right now will be limited to the first 100 records in the people table
anyway.
And so that's fine.
But let's go ahead and just run this and see what we get.
OK, so notice now we've got Harry Johnson repeated twice, right?
Harry Johnson.
But we've got his two kids now.
Jack Johnson and Mary Johnson.
So again, what we're seeing here is a result set that is more from the perspective of the children.
However, we're getting all these novels because we're doing a left outer join everywhere.
Which is just to say, if there are parents who don't have children, then just depict the child columns
as novels.
Right.
So we're seeing everybody now, but that's pretty much it.
So if we had chosen to add in more columns, we could have used a query like this in place of the way
that we did parent child relationships in our code.
Right.
But the output is essentially the same.
And like I said, this is actually pretty flexible because let's imagine that you're working with a
data base that has already been created by someone other than you.
But now you get new business requirements that tell you that you have to implement some relationship
between records, either in the same table or between multiple tables.
But you're not allowed to modify the existing tables so you can add new tables, but you're not allowed
to modify existing tables.
In that case, you would pretty much have to use a join table like we're using here.
So join tables are really actually quite flexible.
And that's really all I wanted to show you in this lesson.
Just making sure that you're aware that there's another way to establish these relationships between
records by simply introducing a join table.
All right.
So with that, I'm going to close out this lesson and I will see you in the next one.